how-to: add quick-start-with-tidb doc (#2320)
pingcap/docs: how-to/get-started/quick-start-with-tidb.md

---
title: Quick Start with TiDB
summary: Learn how to quick start your first TiDB cluster and try out the features.
category: how-to
---

> # Quick Start with TiDB

Author: ```suggestion

# Quick Start with TiDB
```

---
title: Quick Start with TiDB

> summary: Learn how to quick start your first TiDB cluster and try out the features.

Reviewer: -> summary: Learn how to quickly get started with the TiDB platform and see if TiDB is the right choice for you.

category: how-to
---

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

# Quick Start with TiDB

> This document describes how to try out TiDB, a distributed SQL database. You can choose any of the following three methods to start your first TiDB cluster:

Reviewer: start your first TiDB cluster -> get started with the TiDB database platform.

> This document describes how to try out TiDB, a distributed SQL database. You can choose any of the following three methods to start your first TiDB cluster:

Reviewer: I replaced the statement of the TiDB cluster to be the TiDB database platform because:
1. to avoid the confusion as I mentioned earlier.
2. TiDB WASM does not start a TiDB cluster. It is only one TiDB server instance in a browser. It does not have PD or TiKV in it.

- [Try out TiDB with one click using TiDB-Wasm](#try-out-tidb-with-one-click-using-tidb-wasm)
- [Deploy a local test environment using TiUP Playground](#deploy-a-local-test-environment-using-tiup-playground)
- [Deploy a quasi-production test environment on a single machine using TiUP cluster](#deploya-quasi-production-test-environment-on-a-single-machine-using-tiup-cluster)

> **Note:**
>
> It is not recommended to deploy TiDB for production environments with the above three methods. Instead, you can [deploy TiDB using TiUP](/how-to/deploy/orchestrated/tiup.md).

## Try out TiDB with one click using TiDB-Wasm

> - Scenario: Have a first taste on the basic features of TiDB, such as syntax and compatibility.

Reviewer: -> Scenario: Experiment with TiDB SQL and test the TiDB compatibility with MySQL queries.

- Time required: Instant

> TiDB-Wasm is a TiDB cluster running in the browser. You can use TiDB simply by opening a web page and perform basic operations such as executing SQL statements and verifying compatibility.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TiDB-Wasm is a TiDB cluster running in the browser. With TiDB-Wasm, you can use TiDB simply by opening a web page and perform basic operations such as executing SQL statements and verifying compatibility.
```

Reviewer: -> TiDB-Wasm enables you to run a TiDB server instance in a browser so that you can experiment with SQL and test TiDB compatibility with MySQL queries.

> Click to [try TiDB-Wasm](https://tour.pingcap.com). The TiDB cluster will be built in the memory, expectedly in around 10 seconds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Click to try TiDB-Wasm: <https://tour.pingcap.com>. The TiDB cluster will be built in the memory, which takes about 10 seconds.
```
Suggest showing the readers the URL of TiDB-Wasm.

> Click to [try TiDB-Wasm](https://tour.pingcap.com). The TiDB cluster will be built in the memory, expectedly in around 10 seconds.

Reviewer: Click to try TiDB-Wasm playground: <https://tour.tidb.io>. It takes about 10 seconds to launch the TiDB server instance in your browser.  The playground walks you through the basic TiDB SQL statements such as DDL, DML and CRUD operations.

## Deploy a local test environment using TiUP Playground

- Scenario: Quickly deploy a TiDB cluster on a local Mac or Linux OS machine. You can see the basic architecture of TiDB and how TiDB, TiKV, PD, monitoring, and other components run in a TiDB cluster.
- Time required: 1 minute

As a distributed system, a basic TiDB test cluster usually consists of 2 TiDB instances, 3 TiKV instances, and 3 PD instances. With TiUP Playground, you can quickly build the above test cluster by taking the following steps:

1. Download and install TiUP:

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ```shell
    curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://tiup-mirrors.pingcap.com/install.sh | sh
    ```

2. Declare the global environment variable:

    {< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ```shell
    source .bash_profile
    ``` 

>     > **Note:**
>     >
>     > After the installation, TiUP gives the absolute path of the corresponding `profile` file. You need to modify the above `source` command according to the path.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    > **Note:**
    >
    > After the installation, TiUP gives the absolute path of the corresponding `profile` file. You need to modify the following `source` command according to the path.
```
Users might execute the command before they see this note, so I suggest moving this note above the command.

Reviewer: gives -> displays

3. Install TiUP Playground:

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ```shell
    tiup install playground
    ```

    If you have installed TiUP Playground before, execute the following command to upgrade it to the latest version:

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ```shell
    tiup update playground
    ```

> 4. Execute the following command in the current session to start the cluster:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Start the cluster in the current session:
```

    - If you want to start a TiDB cluster of the latest version with 1 TiDB instance, 1 TiKV instance, and 1 PD instance, run the following command:

        {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

        ```shell
        tiup playground
        ```
    

>     - If you want to specify the version and the number of the component instances, run the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - If you want to specify the TiDB version and the number of the instances of each component, run a command like this:
```

        {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

        ```shell
        tiup playground v4.0.0-rc --db 2 --pd 3 --kv 3 --monitor
        ```
    
        The command downloads a v4.0.0-rc cluster to the local machine and starts it.

>         `--monitor` means that the monitoring component will also be deployed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        `--monitor` means that the monitoring component is also deployed.
```

>         The execution results show the access methods of the cluster:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        This command returns the access methods of the cluster:
```

        ```log
        CLUSTER START SUCCESSFULLY, Enjoy it ^-^
        To connect TiDB: mysql --host 127.0.0.1 --port 4000 -u root
        To connect TiDB: mysql --host 127.0.0.1 --port 4001 -u root
        To view the dashboard: http://127.0.0.1:2379/dashboard
        To view the monitor: http://127.0.0.1:9090
        ```

5. Start a new session to access TiDB:

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ```shell
    mysql --host 127.0.0.1 --port 4000 -u root
    ```

6. Access the Prometheus dashboard of TiDB at <http://127.0.0.1:9090>.

7. Access the TiDB Dashboard at <http://127.0.0.1:2379/dashboard>. The default username is `root`, with an empty password.

8. After the test, you can clean the cluster by taking the following steps:

    1. Stop the process by pressing `ctrl-c`.

    2. Run the following command:

        {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

        ```shell
        tiup clean --all
        ```

> ## Deploy a quasi-production test environment on a single machine using TiUP cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Set up a quasi-production environment on a single machine using TiUP cluster
```

Reviewer: I am not sure of the statement of "quasi-production environment", because a single-machine cluster is hardly close to production deployment. I know the Chinese version says so, but in English, let's just use `test` environment.

- Scenario: Experience a smallest TiDB cluster with the complete topology and simulate the production deployment steps on a single Linux server.
- Time required: 10 minutes

This section describes how to deploy a TiDB cluster using a YAML file of the smallest topology in TiUP.

### Prepare

Prepare a deployment machine that meets the following requirements:

- CentOS 7.3 or a later version is installed

> - The Linux OS has access to the Internet, which can be used to download TiDB and related software installation packages

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The Linux OS has access to the Internet, which is required to download TiDB and related software installation packages
```

> The smallest TiDB topology is as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The smallest TiDB cluster topology is as follows:
```

> | Instance | Number | IP | Configuration |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Instance | Count | IP | Configuration |
```

|:-- | :-- | :-- | :-- |
| TiKV | 3 | 10.0.1.1 <br> 10.0.1.1 <br> 10.0.1.1 | Avoid conflict between the port and the directory |
| TiDB | 1 | 10.0.1.1 | The default port <br> Global directory configuration |
| PD | 1 | 10.0.1.1 | The default port <br> Global directory configuration |
| TiFlash | 1 | 10.0.1.1 | The default port <br> Global directory configuration |
| Monitor | 1 | 10.0.1.1 | The default port <br> Global directory configuration |

Other requirements for the deployment machine:

> - Know the root user password

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `root` user and its password is required
```

> - Stop the firewall service of the deployment machine, or open the port needed by the TiDB cluster nodes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Stop the firewall service of the deployment machine](/how-to/deploy/orchestrated/tiup.md#how-to-stop-the-firewall-service-of-deployment-machines), or open the port needed by the TiDB cluster nodes
```

- Currently, TiUP only supports deploying TiDB on the x86_64 (AMD64) architecture (the ARM architecture will be supported in TiDB 4.0 GA):

    - It is recommended to use CentOS 7.3 or later versions on AMD64
    - It is recommended to use CentOS 7.6 1810 on ARM

### Deploy

> **Note:**
>

> > You can log in to the host as any ordinary user or the root user of the Linux OS. The following steps use the root user as an example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> You can log in to the deployment machine as a regular user or the `root` user. The following steps use the `root` user as an example.
```

1. Download and install TiUP:

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ```shell
    curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://tiup-mirrors.pingcap.com/install.sh | sh
    ```

2. Install the cluster component of TiUP:

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ```shell
    tiup cluster
    ```

3. If the TiUP cluster is already installed on the machine, update the software version:

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ```shell
    tiup update cluster
    ```

> 4. Use the root user access to increase the connection limit of the `sshd` service. This is because TiUP needs to simulate deployment on multiple machines.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Use the `root` user privilege to increase the connection limit of the `sshd` service. This is because TiUP needs to simulate deployment on multiple machines.
```

    1. Modify `/etc/ssh/sshd_config`, and set `MaxSessions` to `20`.
    2. Restart the `sshd` service:

        {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

        ```shell
        service sshd restart
        ```

5. Create and start the cluster:

>     Edit the configuration file according to the following template, and name it as `topology.yaml`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Edit the configuration file according to the following template, and name it as `topo.yaml`:
```
A typo in the original text. I'll modify it later.

    ```yaml
    # # Global variables are applied to all deployments and as the default value of
    # # them if the specific deployment value missing.
     
    global:
     user: "tidb"
     ssh_port: 22
     deploy_dir: "/tidb-deploy"
     data_dir: "/tidb-data"
     
    # # Monitored variables are used to all the machine
    monitored:
     node_exporter_port: 9100
     blackbox_exporter_port: 9115
     
    server_configs:
     tidb:
       log.slow-threshold: 300
     tikv:
       readpool.storage.use-unified-pool: true
       readpool.coprocessor.use-unified-pool: true
     pd:
       replication.enable-placement-rules: true
     tiflash:
       logger.level: "info"
     
    pd_servers:
     - host: 10.0.1.1
     
    tidb_servers:
     - host: 10.0.1.1
     
    tikv_servers:
     - host: 10.0.1.1
       port: 20160
       status_port: 20180
     
     - host: 10.0.1.1
       port: 20161
       status_port: 20181
     
     - host: 10.0.1.1
       port: 20162
       status_port: 20182
     
    tiflash_servers:
     - host: 10.0.1.1
     
    monitoring_servers:
     - host: 10.0.1.1
     
    grafana_servers:
     - host: 10.0.1.1
    ```

>     - `user: "tidb"`: Use the `tidb` system user to perform the internal management of the cluster. By default, use port 22 to log in to the target machine via SSH.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - `user: "tidb"`: Use the `tidb` system user (automatically created during deployment) to perform the internal management of the cluster. By default, use port 22 to log in to the target machine via SSH.
```

    - `replication.enable-placement-rules`: This PD parameter is set to ensure that TiFlash runs normally.
    - `host`: The IP of the deployment machine.

6. Execute the cluster deployment command:

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ```shell
    tiup cluster deploy <cluster-name> <tidb-version> ./topo.yaml --user root 
    ```

    - `<cluster-name>`: Set the cluster name

>     - `<tidb-version>`: Set the cluster version. Choose the TiDB version currently supported by running the `tiup list tidb --refresh` command

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - `<tidb-version>`: Set the TiDB cluster version. You can see all the supported TiDB versions by running the `tiup list tidb --refresh` command
```

>     Enter "y" and the root password to complete the deployment:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Enter "y" and the `root` user's password to complete the deployment:
```

    ```log
    Do you want to continue? [y/N]:  y
    Input SSH password:
    ```

7. Start the cluster:

    {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

    ```shell
    tiup cluster start <cluster-name>
    ```

8. Access the cluster:

    - Access TiDB. The password is empty:

        {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

        ```shell
        mysql -h 10.0.1.1 -P 4000 -u root
        ```
    
    - Access the Grafana monitoring dashboard at <http://{grafana-ip}:3000>. The default username and password are both `admin`.

    - Access the TiDB Dashboard at <http://{pd-ip}:2379/dashboard>. The default username is `root`, and the password is empty.

>     - To view the currently deployed cluster list, run the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - To view the currently deployed cluster list:
```

        {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

        ```shell
        tiup cluster list
        ```
    

>     - To view the cluster topology and status, run the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - To view the cluster topology and status:
```
